---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/essays/a-sketch-of-metaplatonism/","tags":["philosophy"]}
---

#wip 
# A sketch of Metaplatonism


## Introduction
Assume an infinite-dimensional-abstract-space (this means that it is analogous but not identical to material or other kinds of spaces) that is constituted by all the possible mental objects (abstracted and *meta-abstracted* from actual mental objects). This includes things like statements (discreet thoughts, for example, all sets) and *qualia*, and combinations and abstractions of them (note that this also includes statements which are not true and *qualia* that might not correspond to any actual real-world experience).

It might seem strange that the space includes both statements and *qualia*. But statements are just one specific kind of *qualia*, characterised by being making a semantic claim. All of them will be called metaplatonic objects, idea-objects or ideas.

All ideas, simple and complex, live inside this space, we will call it the Idea-space or the Meta-Platonic space and we will refer to it as Μ (uppercase-µ). It is called metaplatonic because it takes the Platonic theory of forms and abstracts it to devoid objects of unnecessary teleology and theologic and metaphysical assumptions. The theory or model might be called Metaplatonism or the Meta-Platonic model (M-P).

Μ is not limited by any means. It is not limited by existing *qualia* domains. It is not limited by logical constrains. This might seem completely unreasonable, but we are describing a model that includes logic inside of it, not a model that needs logic to be sustained. We will explain this in more detail shortly.

 The World of Wittgenstein (defined as constituted by all true facts), we will refer to it as @W, lives inside Μ. That means that there is a sub-region or dimension of it that is bounded by a number of truth-statements: metaphysical (the ones that configure the physical —for example, matter, space, time—, they are not given by logic, but constrained by logic, and logic is also constrained by them), logical, mathematical, physical statements, and so on. The necessary-*versus*-contingent characterisations of a true-statement are a spectrum and not a binary division. Metaphysical truths are more necessary than Physical ones, but both are usually considered non-contingent. Fairy-tale, fantasy and fiction worlds all share some truth-layers, but not all of them, with our world. We call this layers context-layers. Then, a plausible definition of truth is such "all idea-objects that live Μ bound by with all the context-planes that accord with our reality", a sort of correspondence theory of truth.

It may seem impossible to state that any model works without assuming the rules of logic, as for *ex falso quodlibet*, it would seem that it couldn't possibly be described by language (as language assumes logic). But we must make a differentiation of looking at the model *from inside* @W versus looking at the model just by itself. 

Logic is a language, *id est*, a syntactic system to encode semantics of some particular ontology. Logic might be thought of as the first level of such languages. We are familiar with @W-logic, as we are with @W-physics. It is easier to imagine non-@W-physical facts than non-@W-logical facts, but they are just as impossible inside @W. Each logic is a description of its particular ontology, and @W-logic will not necessarily work outside @W.  This doesn't mean Μ is not governed by any logic, because each logic is a description of a particular ontology. The totality of Μ itself is described by a logic that completely lacks the concept of negation. With "the totality of Μ itself" we mean only the totality of it, and not necessarily its sub-regions (because our subregion is governed by a logic that does include a semantic negation, @W doesn't (seem, at least, to) allow for contradictions). 

## M-P's explanatory power and applications in different areas of philosophy
The model already solves the Russell Paradox (admittedly rejecting @W-logic). The set of sets that do not contain itself is both contained in itself and not contained in itself. This statement is not inside @W, as it doesn't agree with the logical rule of excluded middle. Naïve Set Theory exists comfortably inside Μ, but not wholly inside @W.

In terms of language, when one thinks or utters a thought, one is expressing or referring to a specific idea-object. The first goal of spoken and written language is to replicate an idea-object from one's mind to another mind or system, this is a definition of communication. The language elements themselves are only signifiers of the idea-object in question. This explains very well what people mean when they say "I know but I don't know how to explain", they have the pertinent idea-object in their mind but don't know how to translate it into words for the other person to understand. A specific idea-object in someone's mind is usually extraordinary complex and includes all (closely and distantly) related concepts, this is why it is difficult to communicate with people with whom one share less context, as language is designed to communicate only the relevant fraction of the meaning intended, and the rest of it is unnecessary to be communicated as it is already shared.

An example that is quite telling to illustrate this is the issue of baptism in different denominations of the Christian religion. Baptism is a ritual of acceptance into the Christian community which a person is submerged in or sprinkled with water "in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit", the Christian God, composed of three persons (in the orthodox theological interpretation of the Trinity), as instructed by the Holy Scriptures of Christianity. The Roman Catholic Church accepts as valid the baptism of some denominations (like most Protestants, and Eastern Orthodox), but doesn't accept the baptism of Mormons. Mormons are baptised in the same outer way as the other groups, but the Roman Catholic Church notes that their vision of God is not trinitarian but unitarian. The idea-object that everyone has in their mind while taking part in a Mormon baptism is not the trinitarian God, but a unitarian God that is not the of the same essence as Jesus-Christ and the Holy Spirit. So, saying the same, the meaning is not the same. This issue exists even if the Christian Trinitarian or Mormon God wouldn't exist. Certainly people are pointing at *something* when they *mean* the words, and this is irrespective of that *something* even existing.



There are also some points of possible theological relevance. Aristotle defined of God as Pure Actuality. Μ seems to be Pure Potentiality. 

Another interesting idea (not so much for the model in itself, but for the move of rejecting the absolute necessity of @W-logic outside @W) is the question about where does logic come from as a worthwhile theological question. Assuming logic predates God is not satisfactory; this is another way of saying that the traditional definition of omnipotence is not satisfactory; one can think of a kind of *Eytyphron*'s dilemma, but for logic instead of ethics. In the same sense that an omnipotent creator-of-all God is outside Time, creates Time and then chooses to inhabits Time; so God is outside the bounds of logic, creates logic and then chooses to inhabit logic.

## Ontological status of Μ
In the same way the laws of nature are useful to scientists and philosophers debate their ontological status, so might this model work (with the little caveat that here is the job of the philosophers to both analyse the explanatory power and debate the ontology). We do note that the actual material world doesn't seem to allow for logical contradictions, which would render the metaplatonic space outside of actual material existence; this is self-evident. We make no claim on the actual ontological status of the Μ, we leave that subject to metaphysical speculation. Maybe some philosophical pragmatist will allow it to be thought of as existing.

We note that this is just a sketch (and currently it is in active progress), meant to give an idea of the model and its interests, and not a comprehensive overview.