---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/essays/on-classical-and-popular-music/","tags":["musicessays"]}
---

# On 'classical' and 'popular' music

On this short piece of writing, I intend to explain what do the labels actually mean and briefly argue for a more precise terminology.

The terms 'classical' and 'popular' are evidently problematic. They are adjectives apt for individual pieces of music, not a tradition. The first movement of *Eine Kleine Nachtmusik* is much more popular than a fair bit of 'popular' music. And certainly the last albums by The Beatles have a much better case to be considered a classic than Luis Spohr's symphonies. All the proposed terms, like 'serious', 'commercial', 'art', and such are unsatisfactory, for they generalise without actually naming what makes both traditions different

And that is the important point. Both are musical traditions. Traditions that are passed from one generation to the other through specific means. Traditions that both have their classics, conventions, cliches, periods, styles, institutions, performance practice, etc.; which have changed and evolved through the years and ages.

"Classical music" is really music in the Western-Tradition-of-Written-Music It is possible to say that tradition properly started in the 11th century, when Guido D'Arezzo started to develop music notation. The instrumental means of the music have varied a lot in 1000 years, but one can broadly talk about four different categories: vocal, chamber, symphonic, solo and electronic/electroacoustic pieces. One can very clearly track the development and evolution of form and harmonic procedures through the centuries. Musicians who write in this tradition have a knowledge of it. Every single "classical" composer knows Bach, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, etc. and has studied them. Every single "classical" composer knows western music notation. Most of them study in conservatoires. They compose music in a specific style, both influenced by the immediate musical *zeitgeist* and part of a bigger tradition. This tradition has also been permeated by popular and *folk* music traditions. This permeation does not and has not affected the tradition's ontological status as a specific tradition.

On the other hand, "popular" music is another tradition, it comes initially from the North American blues. One may call it western-North-American-oral-tradition of music. This might seem NorthAmerican-centric, but if one examines the history of the tradition it seems clear that what most people mean by 'pop' music is the same tradition of rock and pop, though it has been permeated by a number of other traditions from throughout the world. As we said above for 'classical' music, this permeation does not and has not affected the tradition's ontological status as a specific tradition, though in this case one could speak much more about different traditions of popular music merging throughout the 20th century following the more-or-less worldwide unification of listening habits. Most of the musicians that write in this tradition know about the classics (some examples include The Beatles, Pink Floyd, Queen, etc.). The way of studying this music is different, as it usually implies that the "student" learns songs by ear and starts to compose mostly in a selftaught manner. Formally, almost all of this music is based on the song format, but not all of it. Progressive rock has played a lot with form, Pink Floyd's "The Wall" which is more akin to a song cycle. Echoes is a long-form piece.

I think this is the best way to make sense of the differences of the two main musical traditions of the West.